Embrace Reality and Deal with It



There is nothing more important than understanding how reality works and

how to deal with it. The state of mind you bring to this process makes all the

diﬀerence. I have found it helpful to think of my life as if it were a game in

which each problem I face is a puzzle I need to solve. By solving the puzzle, I

get a gem in the form of a principle that helps me avoid the same sort of

problem in the future. Collec ng these gems con nually improves my

decision making, so I am able to ascend to higher and higher levels of play in

which the game gets harder and the stakes become ever greater.

All sorts of emo ons come to me while I am playing and those emo ons

can either help me or hurt me. If I can reconcile my emo ons with my logic

and only act when they are aligned, I make be er decisions.

Learning how reality works, visualizing the things I want to create, and

then building them out is incredibly exci ng to me. Stretching for big goals

puts me in the posi on of failing and needing to learn and come up with new

inven ons in order to move forward. I ﬁnd it exhilara ng being caught up in

the feedback loop of rapid learning—just as a surfer loves riding a wave,

even though it some mes leads to crashes. Don’t get me wrong, I’m s ll

scared of the crashes and I s ll ﬁnd them painful. But I keep that pain in

perspec ve, knowing that I will get through these setbacks and that most of

my learning will come from reﬂec ng on them.14 Just as long-distance

runners push through pain to experience the pleasure of “runner’s high,” I

have largely go en past the pain of my mistake making and instead enjoy the

pleasure that comes with learning from it. I believe that with prac ce you

can change your habits and experience the same “mistake learner’s high.”

1.1 Be a hyperrealist.Understanding, accep ng, and working with reality is both prac cal and

beau ful. I have become so much of a hyperrealist that I’ve learned to

appreciate the beauty of all reali es, even harsh ones, and have come to

despise imprac cal idealism.

Don’t get me wrong: I believe in making dreams happen. To me, there’s

nothing be er in life than doing that. The pursuit of dreams is what gives life

its ﬂavor. My point is that people who create great things aren’t idle

dreamers: They are totally grounded in reality. Being hyperrealis c will help

you choose your dreams wisely and then achieve them. I have found the

following to be almost always true:

a. Dreams + Reality + Determina on = A Successful Life. People who achieve success

and drive progress deeply understand the cause-eﬀect rela onships that

govern reality and have principles for using them to get what they want. The

converse is also true: Idealists who are not well grounded in reality create

problems, not progress.

What does a successful life look like? We all have our own deep-seated

needs, so we each have to decide for ourselves what success is. I don’t care

whether you want to be a master of the universe, a couch potato, or

anything else—I really don’t. Some people want to change the world and

others want to operate in simple harmony with it and savor life. Neither is

be er. Each of us needs to decide what we value most and choose the paths

we take to achieve it.

Take a moment to reﬂect on where you are on the following scale, which

illustrates an overly simpliﬁed choice you should think about. Where would

you put yourself on it?

The ques on isn’t just how much of each to go a er, but how hard to

work to get as much as possible. I wanted crazy amounts of each, was

thrilled to work hard to get as much of them as possible, and found that they

could largely be one and the same and mutually reinforcing. Over me Ilearned that ge ng more out of life wasn’t just a ma er of working harder

at it. It was much more a ma er of working eﬀec vely, because working

eﬀec vely could increase my capacity by hundreds of mes. I don’t care

what you want or how hard you want to work for it. That’s for you to decide.

I’m just trying to pass along to you what has helped me get the most out of

each hour of me and each unit of eﬀort.

Most importantly, I’ve learned that there is no escaping the fact that:

1.2

Truth—or, more precisely, an

understanding of reality—is the

founda on for any good outcome.

accurate

essen al

Most people ﬁght seeing what’s true when it’s not what they want it to be.

That’s bad, because it is more important to understand and deal with the

bad stuﬀ since the good stuﬀ will take care of itself.

Do you agree with that? If not, you are unlikely to beneﬁt from what

follows. If you do agree, let’s build on it.

1.3 Be radically open-minded and radically transparent.

None of us is born knowing what is true; we either have to discover what’s

true for ourselves or believe and follow others. The key is to know which

path will yield be er results.15 I believe that:

a. Radical open-mindedness and radical transparency are invaluable for rapid learning and

eﬀec ve change. Learning is the product of a con nuous real- me feedback

loop in which we make decisions, see their outcomes, and improve our

understanding of reality as a result. Being radically open-minded enhances

the eﬃciency of those feedback loops, because it makes what you are doing,

and why, so clear to yourself and others that there can’t be any

misunderstandings. The more open-minded you are, the less likely you are to

deceive yourself—and the more likely it is that others will give you honest

feedback. If they are “believable” people (and it’s very important to know

who is “believable”16), you will learn a lot from them.Being radically transparent and radically open-minded accelerates this

learning process. It can also be diﬃcult because being radically transparent

rather than more guarded exposes one to cri cism. It’s natural to fear that.

Yet if you don’t put yourself out there with your radical transparency, you

won’t learn.

b. Don’t let fears of what others think of you stand in your way. You must be willing to

do things in the unique ways you think are best—and to open-mindedly

reﬂect on the feedback that comes inevitably as a result of being that way.

Learning to be radically transparent is like learning to speak in public:

While it’s ini ally awkward, the more you do it, the more comfortable you

will be with it. This has been true for me. For example, I s ll ins nc vely ﬁnd

being as radically transparent in the ways that I am in this book

uncomfortable because I am exposing personal material to the public that

will a ract a en on and cri cism. Yet I am doing it because I’ve learned that

it’s best, and I wouldn’t feel good about myself if I let my fears stand in the

way. In other words, I have experienced the posi ve eﬀects of radical

transparency for so long that it’s now uncomfortable for me not to be that

way.

Besides giving me the freedom to be me, it has allowed me to understand

others and for them to understand me, which is much more eﬃcient and

much more enjoyable than not having this understanding. Imagine how

many fewer misunderstandings we would have and how much more eﬃcient

the world would be—and how much closer we all would be to knowing

what’s true—if instead of hiding what they think, people shared it openly.

I’m not talking about everyone’s very personal inner secrets; I’m talking

about people’s opinions of each other and of how the world works. As you’ll

see, I’ve learned ﬁrsthand how powerful this kind of radical truth and

transparency is in improving my decision making and my rela onships. So

whenever I’m faced with the choice, my ins nct is to be transparent. I

prac ce it as a discipline and I recommend you do the same.

c. Embracing radical truth and radical transparency will bring more meaningful work and

more meaningful rela onships. My experience, based on watching thousands of

people try this approach, is that with prac ce the vast majority ﬁnd it sorewarding and pleasurable that they have a hard me opera ng any other

way.

This takes prac ce and changing one’s habits. I have found that it typically

takes about eighteen months, which is how long it takes to change most

habits.

1.4 Look to nature to learn how reality works.

All the laws of reality were given to us by nature. Man didn’t create these

laws, but by understanding them we can use them to foster our own

evolu on and achieve our goals. For example, our ability to ﬂy or to send cell

phone signals around the world came from understanding and applying the

exis ng rules of reality—the physical laws or principles that govern the

natural world.

While I spend most of my me studying the reali es that aﬀect me most

directly—those that drive economies, the markets, and the people I deal

with—I also spend me in nature and can’t help reﬂec ng on how it works

by observing, reading, and speaking with some of the greatest specialists on

the subject. I’ve found it both interes ng and valuable to observe which laws

we humans have in common with the rest of nature and which diﬀeren ate

us. Doing that has had a big impact on my approach to life.

First of all, I see how cool it is that the brain’s evolu on gave us the ability

to reﬂect on how reality works in this way. Man’s most dis nc ve quality is

our singular ability to look down on reality from a higher perspec ve and

synthesize an understanding of it. While other species operate by following

their ins ncts, man alone can go above himself and look at himself within his

circumstances and within me (including before and a er his existence). For

example, we can ponder the ways that nature’s ﬂying machines, swimming

machines, and billions of other machines, from the microscopic to the

cosmic, interact with one another to make up a working whole that evolves

through me. This is because the evolu on of the brain gave man a much

more developed neocortex, which gives us the power to think abstractly and

logically.

While our higher-level thinking makes us unique among species, it can

also make us uniquely confused. Other species have much simpler and morestraigh orward lives, without any of man’s wrestling with what’s good and

what’s bad. In contrast with animals, most people struggle to reconcile their

emo ons and their ins ncts (which come from the animal parts of their

brains) with their reasoning (which comes from parts of the brain more

developed in humans). This struggle causes people to confuse what they

want to be true with what actually is true. Let’s look at this dilemma to try to

understand how reality works.

When trying to understand anything—economies, markets, the weather,

whatever—one can approach the subject with two perspec ves:

1. Top down: By trying to ﬁnd the one code/law that drives them all. For

example, in the case of markets, one could study universal laws like

supply and demand that aﬀect all economies and markets. In the case

of species, one could focus on learning how the gene c code (DNA)

works for all species.

2. Bo om up: By studying each speciﬁc case and the codes/laws that are

true for them, for example, the codes or laws par cular to the market

for wheat or the DNA sequences that make ducks diﬀerent from other

species.

Seeing things from the top down is the best way to understand ourselves

and the laws of reality within the context of overarching universal laws.

That’s not to say it’s not worth having a bo om-up perspec ve. In fact, to

understand the world accurately you need both. By taking a bo om-up

perspec ve that looks at each individual case, we can see how it lines up

with our theories about the laws that we expect to govern it. When they line

up, we’re good.

By looking at nature from the top down, we can see that much of what

we call human nature is really animal nature. That’s because the human

brain is programmed with millions of years of gene c learning that we share

with other species. Because we share common roots and common laws, we

and other animals have similar a ributes and constraints. For example, the

male/female sexual reproduc on process, using two eyes to provide depth

percep on, and many other systems are shared by many species in the

animal kingdom. Similarly, our brains have some “animal” parts that are

much older in evolu onary terms than humanity is. These laws that we havein common are the most overarching ones. They wouldn’t be apparent to us

if we just looked at ourselves.

If you just looked at one species—ducks, for example—to try to

understand the universal laws, you’d fail. Similarly, if you just looked at

mankind to understand the universal laws, you’d fail. Man is just one of ten

million species and just one of the billions of manifesta ons of the forces

that bring together and take apart atoms through me. Yet most people are

like ants focused only on themselves and their own anthill; they believe the

universe revolves around people and don’t pay a en on to the universal

laws that are true for all species.

To try to ﬁgure out the universal laws of reality and principles for dealing

with it, I’ve found it helpful to try to look at things from nature’s perspec ve.

While mankind is very intelligent in rela on to other species, we have the

intelligence of moss growing on a rock compared to nature as a whole. We

are incapable of designing and building a mosquito, let alone all the species

and most of the other things in the universe. So I start from the premise that

nature is smarter than I am and try to let nature teach me how reality works.

a. Don’t get hung up on your views of how things “should” be because you will miss out on

learning how they really are. It’s important not to let our biases stand in the way

of our objec vity. To get good results, we need to be analy cal rather than

emo onal.

Whenever I observe something in nature that I (or mankind) think is

wrong, I assume that I’m wrong and try to ﬁgure out why what nature is

doing makes sense. That has taught me a lot. It has changed my thinking

about 1) what’s good and what’s bad, 2) what my purpose in life is, and 3)

what I should do when faced with my most important choices. To help

explain why, I will give you a simple example.

When I went to Africa a number of years ago, I saw a pack of hyenas take

down a young wildebeest. My reac on was visceral. I felt empathy for the

wildebeest and thought that what I had witnessed was horrible. But was that

because it was horrible or was it because I am biased to believe it’s horrible

when it is actually wonderful? That got me thinking. Would the world be a

be er or worse place if what I’d seen hadn’t occurred? That perspec ve

drove me to consider the second- and third-order consequences so that I

could see that the world would be worse. I now realize that nature op mizesfor the whole, not for the individual, but most people judge good and bad

based only on how it aﬀects them. What I had seen was the process of

nature at work, which is much more eﬀec ve at furthering the improvement

of the whole than any process man has ever invented.

Most people call something bad if it is bad for them or bad for those they

empathize with, ignoring the greater good. This tendency extends to groups:

One religion will consider its beliefs good and another religion’s beliefs bad

to such an extent that their members might kill each other in the mutual

convic on that each is doing what’s right. Typically, people’s conﬂic ng

beliefs or conﬂic ng interests make them unable to see things through

another’s eyes. That’s not good and it doesn’t make sense. While I could

understand people liking something that helps them and disliking things that

hurt them, it doesn’t make sense to call something good or bad in an

absolute sense based only on how it aﬀects individuals. To do so would

presume that what the individual wants is more important than the good of

the whole. To me, nature seems to deﬁne good as what’s good for the whole

and op mizes for it, which is preferable. So I have come to believe that as a

general rule:

b. To be “good” something must operate consistently with the laws of reality and contribute

to the evolu on of the whole; that is what is most rewarded. For example, if you come

up with something the world values, you almost can’t help but be rewarded.

Conversely, reality tends to penalize those people, species, and things that

don’t work well and detract from evolu on.17

In looking at what is true for everything, I have come to believe that:

c. Evolu on is the single greatest force in the universe; it is the only thing that is permanent

and it drives everything.18 Everything from the smallest subatomic par cle to the

en re galaxy is evolving. While everything apparently dies or disappears in

me, the truth is that it all just gets reconﬁgured in evolving forms.

Remember that energy can’t be destroyed—it can only be reconﬁgured. So

the same stuﬀ is con nuously falling apart and coalescing in diﬀerent forms.

The force behind that is evolu on.

For example, the primary purpose of every living thing is to act as a vessel

for the DNA that evolves life through me. The DNA that exists within eachindividual came from an eternity ago and will con nue to live long a er its

individual carriers pass away, in increasingly evolved forms.19

As I thought about evolu on, I realized that it exists in other forms than

life and is carried out through other transmission mechanisms than DNA.

Technologies, languages, and everything else evolves. Knowledge, for

example, is like DNA in that it is passed from genera on to genera on and

evolves; its impact on people over many genera ons can be as great or

greater than that of the gene c code.

Evolu on is good because it is the process of adapta on that generally

moves things toward improvement. All things such as products,

organiza ons, and human capabili es evolve through me in a similar way. It

is simply the process by which things either adapt and improve or die. To me

this evolu onary process looks like what you see on the right:Evolu on consists of adapta ons/inven ons that provide spurts of

beneﬁts that decline in value. That painful decline leads either to new

adapta ons and new inven ons that bring new products, organiza ons, and

human capabili es to new and higher levels of development (as shown in

the top diagram on the facing page); or decline and death, which looks like

the diagram at bo om le .

Think of any product, organiza on, or person you know and you will see

that this is true. The world is li ered with once-great things that deteriorated

and failed; only a rare few have kept reinven ng themselves to go on to new

heights of greatness. All machines eventually break down, decompose, and

have their parts recycled to create new machines. That includes us.

Some mes this makes us sad because we’ve become a ached to our

machines, but if you look at it from the higher level, it’s really beau ful to

observe how the machine of evolu on works.

From this perspec ve, we can see that perfec on doesn’t exist; it is a goal

that fuels a never-ending process of adapta on. If nature, or anything, were

perfect it wouldn’t be evolving. Organisms, organiza ons, and individual

people are always highly imperfect but capable of improving. So rather than

ge ng stuck hiding our mistakes and pretending we’re perfect, it makes

sense to ﬁnd our imperfec ons and deal with them. You will either learn

valuable lessons from your mistakes and press on, be er equipped to

succeed—or you won’t and you will fail.

As the saying goes:

d. Evolve or die. This evolu onary cycle is not just for people but for countries,

companies, economies—for everything. And it is naturally self-correc ng as a

whole, though not necessarily for its parts. For example, if there is too much

supply and waste in a market, prices will go down, companies will go out of

business, and capacity will be reduced un l the supply falls in line with the

demand, at which me the cycle will start to move in the opposite direc on.

Similarly, if an economy turns bad enough, those responsible for running it

will make the poli cal and policy changes that are needed—or they will not

survive, making room for their replacements to come along. These cycles are

con nuous and play out in logical ways—and they tend to be self-reinforcing.The key is to fail, learn, and improve quickly. If you’re constantly learning

and improving, your evolu onary process will look like the one that’s

ascending. Do it poorly and it will look like what you see on the le , or

worse.

I believe that:

1.5 Evolving is life’s greatest accomplishment and its

greatest reward.

It is ins nctually that way, which is why most of us feel the pull of it—in

other words, we ins nc vely want to get be er at things and have created

and evolved technology to help us. History has shown that all species will

either go ex nct or evolve into other species, though with our limited me

window that is hard for us to see. But we do know that what we call

mankind was simply the result of DNA evolving into a new form about two

hundred thousand years ago, and we know that mankind will certainly

either go ex nct or evolve into a higher state. I personally believe there is a

good chance man will begin to evolve at an accelera ng pace with the help

of man-made technologies that can analyze vast amounts of data and

“think” faster and be er than we can. I wonder how many centuries it will

take for us to evolve into a higher-level species that will be much closer to

omniscience than we are now—if we don’t destroy ourselves ﬁrst.

One of the great marvels of nature is how the whole system, which is full

of individual organisms ac ng in their own self-interest and without

understanding or guiding what’s going on, can create a beau fully opera ng

and evolving whole. While I’m not an expert at this, it seems that it’s

because evolu on has produced a) incen ves and interac ons that lead to

individuals pursuing their own interests and resul ng in the advancement of

the whole, b) the natural selec on process, and c) rapid experimenta on

and adapta on.

a. The individual’s incen ves must be aligned with the group’s goals.To give you a quick

example of nature crea ng incen ves that lead to individuals pursuing their

own interests that result in the advancement of the whole, look at sex and

natural selec on. Nature gave us one hell of an incen ve to have sex in theform of the great pleasure it provides, even though the purpose of having

sex is to contribute to the advancement of the DNA. That way, we

individually get what we want while contribu ng to the evolu on of the

whole.

b. Reality is op mizing for the whole—not for you. Contribute to the whole and you

will likely be rewarded. Natural selec on leads to be er quali es being

retained and passed along (e.g., in be er genes, be er abili es to nurture

others, be er products, etc.). The result is a constant cycle of improvement

for the whole.

c. Adapta on through rapid trial and error is invaluable. Natural selec on’s trial-and-

error process allows improvement without anyone understanding or guiding

it. The same can apply to how we learn. There are at least three kinds of

learning that foster evolu on: memory-based learning (storing the

informa on that comes in through one’s conscious mind so that we can

recall it later); subconscious learning (the knowledge we take away from our

experiences that never enters our conscious minds, though it aﬀects our

decision making); and “learning” that occurs without thinking at all, such as

the changes in DNA that encode a species’ adapta ons. I used to think that

memory-based, conscious learning was the most powerful, but I’ve since

come to understand that it produces less rapid progress than

experimenta on and adapta on. To give you an example of how nature

improves without thinking, just look at the struggle that mankind (with all

its thinking) has experienced in trying to outsmart viruses (which don’t even

have brains). Viruses are like brilliant chess opponents. By evolving quickly

(combining diﬀerent gene c material across diﬀerent strains), they keep the

smartest minds in the global health community busy thinking up

countermoves to hold them oﬀ. Understanding that is especially helpful in

an era when computers can run large numbers of simula ons replica ng

the evolu onary process to help us see what works and what doesn’t.

In the next chapter I will describe a process that has helped me, and I

believe can help you, evolve quickly. But ﬁrst I want to emphasize how

important your perspec ve is in trying to decide what is important to you

and what to go a er.d. Realize that you are simultaneously everything and nothing—and decide what you want

to be. It is a great paradox that individually we are simultaneously everything

and nothing. Through our own eyes, we are everything—e.g., when we die,

the whole world disappears. So to most people (and to other species) dying

is the worst thing possible, and it is of paramount importance that we have

the best life possible. However, when we look down on ourselves through

the eyes of nature we are of absolutely no signiﬁcance. It is a reality that

each one of us is only one of about seven billion of our species alive today

and that our species is only one of about ten million species on our planet.

Earth is just one of about 100 billion planets in our galaxy, which is just one

of about two trillion galaxies in the universe. And our life mes are only

about 1/3,000 of humanity’s existence, which itself is only 1/20,000 of the

Earth’s existence. In other words, we are unbelievably ny and short-lived

and no ma er what we accomplish, our impact will be insigniﬁcant. At the

same me, we ins nctually want to ma er and to evolve, and we can

ma er a ny bit—and it’s all those ny bits that add up to drive the

evolu on of the universe.

The ques on is how we ma er and evolve. Do we ma er to others (who

also don’t ma er in the grand scope of things) or in some greater sense that

we will never actually achieve? Or does it not ma er if we ma er so we

should forget about the ques on and just enjoy our lives while they last?

e. What you will be will depend on the perspec ve you have. Where you go in life will

depend on how you see things and who and what you feel connected to

(your family, your community, your country, mankind, the whole ecosystem,

everything). You will have to decide to what extent you will put the interests

of others above your own, and which others you will choose to do so for.

That’s because you will regularly encounter situa ons that will force you to

make such choices.

While such decisions might seem too erudite for your taste, you will make

them either consciously or subliminally, and they will be very important.

For me personally, I now ﬁnd it thrilling to embrace reality, to look down

on myself through nature’s perspec ve, and to be an inﬁnitesimally small

part of the whole. My ins nctual and intellectual goal is simply to evolveand contribute to evolu on in some ny way while I’m here and while I am

what I am. At the same me, the things I love most—my work and my

rela onships—are what mo vate me. So, I ﬁnd how reality and nature

work, including how I and everything will decompose and recompose,

beau ful—though emo onally I ﬁnd the separa on from those I care about

diﬃcult to appreciate.

1.6 Understand nature’s prac cal lessons.

I have found understanding how nature and evolu on work helpful in a

number of ways. Most importantly, it has helped me deal with my reali es

more eﬀec vely and make diﬃcult choices. When I began to look at reality

through the perspec ve of ﬁguring out how it really works, instead of

thinking things should be diﬀerent, I realized that most everything that at

ﬁrst seemed “bad” to me—like rainy days, weaknesses, and even death—

was because I held preconceived no ons of what I personally wanted. With

me, I learned that my ini al reac on was because I hadn’t put whatever I

was reac ng to in the context of the fact that reality is built to op mize for

the whole rather than for me.

a. Maximize your evolu on. Earlier, I men oned that the unique abili es of

thinking logically, abstractly, and from a higher level are carried out in

structures located in the neocortex. These parts of the brain are more

developed in humans and allow us to reﬂect on ourselves and direct our

own evolu on. Because we are capable of conscious, memory-based

learning, we can evolve further and faster than any other species, changing

not just across genera ons but within our own life mes.

This constant drive toward learning and improvement makes ge ng

be er innately enjoyable and ge ng be er fast exhilara ng. Though most

people think that they are striving to get the things (toys, bigger houses,

money, status, etc.) that will make them happy, for most people those

things don’t supply anywhere near the long-term sa sfac on that ge ng

be er at something does.20 Once we get the things we are striving for, we

rarely remain sa sﬁed with them. The things are just the bait. Chasing a er

them forces us to evolve, and it is the evolu on and not the rewardsthemselves that ma ers to us and to those around us. This means that for

most people success is struggling and evolving as eﬀec vely as possible, i.e.,

learning rapidly about oneself and one’s environment, and then changing to

improve.

It is natural that it should be this way because of the law of diminishing

returns.21 Consider what acquiring money is like. People who earn so much

that they derive li le or no marginal gains from it will experience nega ve

consequences, as with any other form of excess, like glu ony. If they are

intellectually healthy, they will begin seeking something new or seeking new

depths in something old—and they will get stronger in the process. As

Freud put it, “Love and work are the cornerstones of our humanness.”

The work doesn’t necessarily have to be a job, though I believe it’s

generally be er if it is a job. It can be any kind of long-term challenge that

leads to personal improvement. As you might have guessed, I believe that

the need to have meaningful work is connected to man’s innate desire to

improve. And rela onships are the natural connec ons to others that make

us relevant to each other and to society more broadly.

b. Remember “no pain, no gain.” Realizing that we innately want to evolve—and

that the other stuﬀ we are going a er, while nice, won’t sustain our

happiness—has helped me focus on my goals of evolving and contribu ng

to evolu on in my own inﬁnitely small way. While we don’t like pain,

everything that nature made has a purpose, so nature gave us pain for a

purpose. So what is its purpose? It alerts us and helps direct us.

c. It is a fundamental law of nature that in order to gain strength one has to push one’s

limits, which is painful. As Carl Jung put it, “Man needs diﬃcul es. They are

necessary for health.” Yet most people ins nctually avoid pain. This is true

whether we are talking about building the body (e.g., weight li ing) or the

mind (e.g., frustra on, mental struggle, embarrassment, shame)—and

especially true when people confront the harsh reality of their own

imperfec ons.

1.7 Pain + Reﬂec on = Progress.There is no avoiding pain, especially if you’re going a er ambi ous goals.

Believe it or not, you are lucky to feel that kind of pain if you approach it

correctly, because it is a signal that you need to ﬁnd solu ons so you can

progress. If you can develop a reﬂexive reac on to psychic pain that causes

you to reﬂect on it rather than avoid it, it will lead to your rapid

learning/evolving.22 A er seeing how much more eﬀec ve it is to face the

painful reali es that are caused by your problems, mistakes, and

weaknesses, I believe you won’t want to operate any other way. It’s just a

ma er of ge ng in the habit of doing it.

Most people have a tough me reﬂec ng when they are in pain and they

pay a en on to other things when the pain passes, so they miss out on the

reﬂec ons that provide the lessons. If you can reﬂect well while you’re in

pain (which is probably too much to ask), great. But if you can remember to

reﬂect a er it passes, that’s valuable too. (I created a Pain Bu on app to

help people do this, which I describe in the appendix.)

The challenges you face will test and strengthen you. If you’re not failing,

you’re not pushing your limits, and if you’re not pushing your limits, you’re

not maximizing your poten al. Though this process of pushing your limits,

of some mes failing and some mes breaking through—and deriving

beneﬁts from both your failures and your successes—is not for everyone, if

it is for you, it can be so thrilling that it becomes addic ve. Life will

inevitably bring you such moments, and it’ll be up to you to decide whether

you want to go back for more.

If you choose to push through this o en painful process of personal

evolu on, you will naturally “ascend” to higher and higher levels. As you

climb above the blizzard of things that surrounds you, you will realize that

they seem bigger than they really are when you are seeing them up close;

that most things in life are just “another one of those.” The higher you

ascend, the more eﬀec ve you become at working with reality to shape

outcomes toward your goals. What once seemed impossibly complex

becomes simple.

a. Go to the pain rather than avoid it. If you don’t let up on yourself and instead

become comfortable always opera ng with some level of pain, you will

evolve at a faster pace. That’s just the way it is.Every me you confront something painful, you are at a poten ally

important juncture in your life—you have the opportunity to choose healthy

and painful truth or unhealthy but comfortable delusion. The irony is that if

you choose the healthy route, the pain will soon turn into pleasure. The

pain is the signal! Like switching from not exercising to exercising,

developing the habit of embracing the pain and learning from it will “get

you to the other side.”

By “ge ng to the other side,” I mean that you will become hooked on:

• Iden fying, accep ng, and learning how to deal with your weaknesses,

• Preferring that the people around you be honest with you rather than

keep their nega ve thoughts about you to themselves, and

• Being yourself rather than having to pretend to be strong where you are

weak.

b. Embrace tough love. In my own life, what I want to give to people, most

importantly to people I love, is the power to deal with reality to get what

they want. In pursuit of my goal to give them strength, I will o en deny

them what they “want” because that will give them the opportunity to

struggle so that they can develop the strength to get what they want on

their own. This can be diﬃcult for people emo onally, even if they

understand intellectually that having diﬃcul es is the exercise they need to

grow strong and that just giving them what they want will weaken them and

ul mately lead to them needing more help.23

Of course most people would prefer not to have weaknesses. Our

upbringings and our experiences in the world have condi oned us to be

embarrassed by our weaknesses and hide them. But people are happiest

when they can be themselves. If you can be open with your weaknesses it

will make you freer and will help you deal with them be er. I urge you to

not be embarrassed about your problems, recognizing that everyone has

them. Bringing them to the surface will help you break your bad habits and

develop good ones, and you will acquire real strengths and jus ﬁable

op mism.

This evolu onary process of produc ve adapta on and ascent—the

process of seeking, obtaining, and pursuing more and more ambi ous goals

—does not just pertain to how individuals and society move forward. It isequally relevant when dealing with setbacks, which are inevitable. At some

point in your life you will crash in a big way. You might fail at your job or with

your family, lose a loved one, suﬀer a serious accident or illness, or discover

the life you imagined is out of reach forever. There are a whole host of ways

that something will get you. At such mes, you will be in pain and might

think that you don’t have the strength to go on. You almost always do,

however; your ul mate success will depend on you realizing that fact, even

though it might not seem that way at the moment.

This is why many people who have endured setbacks that seemed

devasta ng at the me ended up as happy as (or even happier than) they

originally were a er they successfully adapted to them. The quality of your

life will depend on the choices you make at those painful moments. The

faster one appropriately adapts, the be er.24 No ma er what you want out

of life, your ability to adapt and move quickly and eﬃciently through the

process of personal evolu on will determine your success and your

happiness. If you do it well, you can change your psychological reac on to it

so that what was painful can become something you crave.

1.8 Weigh second- and third-order consequences.

By recognizing the higher-level consequences nature op mizes for, I’ve

come to see that people who overweigh the ﬁrst-order consequences of

their decisions and ignore the eﬀects of second- and subsequent-order

consequences rarely reach their goals. This is because ﬁrst-order

consequences o en have opposite desirabili es from second-order

consequences, resul ng in big mistakes in decision making. For example,

the ﬁrst-order consequences of exercise (pain and me spent) are

commonly considered undesirable, while the second-order consequences

(be er health and more a rac ve appearance) are desirable. Similarly, food

that tastes good is o en bad for you and vice versa.

Quite o en the ﬁrst-order consequences are the tempta ons that cost

us what we really want, and some mes they are the barriers that stand in

our way. It’s almost as though nature sorts us by throwing us trick choices

that have both types of consequences and penalizing those who make their

decisions on the basis of the ﬁrst-order consequences alone.By contrast, people who choose what they really want, and avoid the

tempta ons and get over the pains that drive them away from what they

really want, are much more likely to have successful lives.

1.9 Own your outcomes.

For the most part, life gives you so many decisions to make and so many

opportuni es to recover from your mistakes that, if you handle them well,

you can have a terriﬁc life. Of course, some mes there are major inﬂuences

on the quality of our lives that come from things beyond our control—the

circumstances we are born into, accidents and illnesses, and so forth—but

for the most part even the worst circumstances can be made be er with

the right approach. For example, a friend of mine dove into a swimming

pool, hit his head, and became a quadriplegic. But he approached his

situa on well and became as happy as anybody else, because there are

many paths to happiness.

My point is simply this: Whatever circumstances life brings you, you will

be more likely to succeed and ﬁnd happiness if you take responsibility for

making your decisions well instead of complaining about things being

beyond your control. Psychologists call this having an “internal locus of

control,” and studies consistently show that people who have it outperform

those who don’t.

So don’t worry about whether you like your situa on or not. Life doesn’t

give a damn about what you like. It’s up to you to connect what you want

with what you need to do to get it and then ﬁnd the courage to carry it

through. In the next chapter I will show you the 5-Step Process that helped

me learn about reality and evolve.

1.10 Look at the machine from the higher level.

Our uniquely human ability to look down from a higher level doesn’t apply

just to understanding reality and the cause-eﬀect rela onships underlying

it; it also applies to looking down on yourself and those around you. I call

this ability to rise above your own and others’ circumstances and objec velylook down on them “higher-level thinking.” Higher-level thinking gives you

the ability to study and inﬂuence the cause-eﬀect rela onships at play in

your life and use them to get the outcomes you want.

a. Think of yourself as a machine opera ng within a machine and know that you have the

ability to alter your machines to produce be er outcomes. You have your goals. I call

the way you will operate to achieve your goals your machine. It consists of a

design (the things that have to get done) and the people (who will do the

things that need ge ng done). Those people include you and those who

help you. For example, imagine that your goal is a military one: to take a hill

from an enemy. Your design for your “machine” might include two scouts,

two snipers, four infantrymen, and so on. While the right design is essen al,

it is only half the ba le. It is equally important to put the right people in

each of those posi ons. They need diﬀerent quali es to do their jobs well—

the scouts must be fast runners, the snipers must be good marksmen—so

that the machine will produce the outcomes you seek.

b. By comparing your outcomes with your goals, you can determine how to modify your

machine. This evalua on and improvement process exactly mirrors the

evolu onary process I described earlier. It means looking at how to improve

or change the design or people to achieve your goals. Schema cally, the

process is a feedback loop, as shown in the diagram on the opposite page.c. Dis nguish between you as the designer of your machine and you as a worker with your

machine. One of the hardest things for people to do is to objec vely look

down on themselves within their circumstances (i.e., their machine) so that

they can act as the machine’s designer and manager. Most people remain

stuck in the perspec ve of being a worker within the machine. If you can

recognize the diﬀerences between those roles and that it is much more

important that you are a good designer/manager of your life than a good

worker in it, you will be on the right path. To be successful, the

“designer/manager you” has to be objec ve about what the “worker you” is

really like, not believing in him more than he deserves, or pu ng him in

jobs he shouldn’t be in. Instead of having this strategic perspec ve, most

people operate emo onally and in the moment; their lives are a series of

undirected emo onal experiences, going from one thing to the next. If you

want to look back on your life and feel you’ve achieved what you wanted to,

you can’t operate that way.

d. The biggest mistake most people make is to not see themselves and others objec vely,

which leads them to bump into their own and others’ weaknesses again and again. People

who do this fail because they are stubbornly stuck in their own heads. If

they could just get around this, they could live up to their poten al.

This is why higher-level thinking is essen al for success.

e. Successful people are those who can go above themselves to see things objec vely and

manage those things to shape change. They can take in the perspec ves of others

instead of being trapped in their own heads with their own biases. They are

able to look objec vely at what they are like—their strengths and

weaknesses—and what others are like to put the right people in the right

roles to achieve their goals. Once you understand how to do this you’ll see

that there’s virtually nothing you can’t accomplish. You will just have to

learn how to face your reali es and use the full range of resources at your

disposal. For example, if you as the designer/manager discover that you as

the worker can’t do something well, you need to ﬁre yourself as the worker

and get a good replacement, while staying in the role of designer/manager

of your own life. You shouldn’t be upset if you ﬁnd out that you’re bad atsomething—you should be happy that you found out, because knowing that

and dealing with it will improve your chances of ge ng what you want.

If you are disappointed because you can’t be the best person to do

everything yourself, you are terribly naive. Nobody can do everything well.

Would you want to have Einstein on your basketball team? When he fails to

dribble and shoot well, would you think badly of him? Should he feel

humiliated? Imagine all the areas in which Einstein was incompetent, and

imagine how hard he struggled to excel even in the areas in which he was

the best in the world.

Watching people struggle and having others watch you struggle can elicit

all kinds of ego-driven emo ons such as sympathy, pity, embarrassment,

anger, or defensiveness. You need to get over all that and stop seeing

struggling as something nega ve. Most of life’s greatest opportuni es come

out of moments of struggle; it’s up to you to make the most of these tests

of crea vity and character.

When encountering your weaknesses you have four choices:

1. You can deny them (which is what most people do).

2. You can accept them and work at them in order to try to convert them

into strengths (which might or might not work depending on your

ability to change).

3. You can accept your weaknesses and ﬁnd ways around them.

4. Or, you can change what you are going a er.

Which solu on you choose will be cri cally important to the direc on of

your life. The worst path you can take is the ﬁrst. Denial can only lead to

your constantly banging up against your weaknesses, having pain, and not

ge ng anywhere. The second—accep ng your weaknesses while trying to

turn them into strengths—is probably the best path if it works. But some

things you will never be good at and it takes a lot of me and eﬀort to

change. The best single clue as to whether you should go down this path is

whether the thing you are trying to do is consistent with your nature (i.e.,

your natural abili es). The third path—accep ng your weaknesses while

trying to ﬁnd ways around them—is the easiest and typically the most viable

path, yet it is the one least followed. The fourth path, changing what youare going a er, is also a great path, though it requires ﬂexibility on your part

to get past your preconcep ons and enjoy the good ﬁt when you ﬁnd it.

f. Asking others who are strong in areas where you are weak to help you is a great skill that

you should develop no ma er what, as it will help you develop guardrails that will prevent

you from doing what you shouldn’t be doing. All successful people are good at this.

g. Because it is diﬃcult to see oneself objec vely, you need to rely on the input of others

and the whole body of evidence. I know that my own life has been full of

mistakes and lots of great feedback. It was only by looking down on this

body of evidence from a higher level that I was able to get around my

mistakes and go a er what I wanted. For as long as I have been prac cing

this, I s ll know I can’t see myself objec vely, which is why I con nue to rely

so much on the input of others.

h. If you are open-minded enough and determined, you can get virtually anything you

want. So I certainly don’t want to dissuade you from going a er whatever

you want. At the same me, I urge you to reﬂect on whether what you are

going a er is consistent with your nature. Whatever your nature is, there

are many paths that will suit you, so don’t ﬁxate on just one. Should a

par cular path close, all you have to do is ﬁnd another good one consistent

with what you’re like. (You’ll learn a lot about how to determine what you’re

like later, in Understand That People Are Wired Very Diﬀerently.)

But most people lack the courage to confront their own weaknesses and

make the hard choices that this process requires. Ul mately, it comes down

to the following ﬁve decisions:

1. Don’t confuse what you wish were true with what is really true.

2. Don’t worry about looking good—worry instead about achieving your goals.

3. Don’t overweight ﬁrst-order consequences rela ve to second- and third-order ones.

4. Don’t let pain stand in the way of progress.

5. Don’t blame bad outcomes on anyone but yourself.

14 I’m sure Transcendental Medita on, which I have been prac cing regularly for nearly

half a century, helped provide me with the equanimity I needed to approach my challengesthis way.

15 You shouldn’t assume that you are always the best person to make decisions for yourself

because o en you aren’t. While it is up to us to know what we want, others may know how

to get it be er than we do because they have strengths where we have weaknesses, or

more relevant knowledge and experience. For example, it’s probably be er for you to

follow your doctor’s advice than your own if you have a medical condi on. Later in this

book, we will look at some of the diﬀerent ways people’s brains are wired and how our

understanding of our own wiring should inﬂuence which choices we make for ourselves

and which we should delegate to others. Knowing when not to make your own decisions is

one of the most important skills you can develop.

16 I’ll explain the concept of believability in more detail in later chapters, but to cover it

quickly: Believable par es are those who have repeatedly and successfully accomplished

something—and have great explana ons for how they did it.

17 There are many things people consider “good” in the sense that they are kind or

considerate but fail to deliver what’s desired (like communism’s “from each according to his

ability, to each according to his needs”). Nature would appear to consider them “bad,” and

I’d agree with nature.

18 Everything other than evolu on eventually disintegrates; we all are, and everything else

is, vehicles for evolu on. For example, while we see ourselves as individuals, we are

essen ally vessels for our genes that have lived millions of years and con nuously use and

shed bodies like ours.

19 I recommend Richard Dawkins’s and E. O. Wilson’s books on evolu on. If I had to pick

just one, it would be Dawkins’s River Out of Eden.

20 Of course, we are o en sa sﬁed with the same things—rela onships, careers, etc.—but

when that is the case, it is typically because we are ge ng new enjoyments from the

changing dimensions of those things.

21 The marginal beneﬁts of moving from a shortage to an abundance of anything decline.

22 Your unique power of reﬂec veness—your ability to look at yourself, the world around

you, and the rela onship between you and the world—means that you can think deeply

and weigh subtle things to come up with learning and wise choices. Asking other believable

people about the root causes of your pain in order to enhance your reﬂec ons is also

typically very helpful—especially others who have opposing views but who share your

interest in ﬁnding the truth rather than being proven right. If you can reﬂect deeply about

your problems, they almost always shrink or disappear, because you almost always ﬁnd a

be er way of dealing with them than if you don’t face them head-on.

23 To be clear, I am not saying people should not be helped. I believe that people should be

helped by giving them opportuni es and the coaching they need to become strong enoughto take advantage of their opportuni es. As the saying goes, “God helps those who help

themselves.” But this isn’t easy, especially with people you care about. To be eﬀec ve in

helping people learn from painful experiences, you must explain the logic and caring

behind what you’re doing clearly and repeatedly. As you read in “Where I’m Coming From,”

this was a large part of what compelled me to explain my principles.

24 Your ability to see the changing landscape and adapt is more a func on of your

percep on and reasoning than your ability to learn and process quickly.BAD

Avoid facing “harsh

reali es.”

GOOD

Face “harsh reali es.”BAD

Worry about appearing

good.

GOOD

Worry about achieving the

goal.BAD

Make your decisions on the

basis of ﬁrst-order

consequences.

GOOD

Make your decisions on the

basis of ﬁrst-, second-, and

third-order consequences.BAD

Allow pain to stand in the

way of progress.

GOOD

Understand how to manage

pain to produce progress.BAD

Don’t hold yourself and

others accountable.

GOOD

Hold yourself and others

accountable.
